Background: Associated with high-dimensional omics data there are often "meta-features" such as biological pathways and functional annotations, summary statistics from similar studies that can be informative for predicting an outcome of interest. We introduce a regularized hierarchical framework for integrating meta-features, with the goal of improving prediction and feature selection performance with time-to-event outcomes. Methods: A hierarchical framework is deployed to incorporate meta-features. Regularization is applied to the omic features as well as the meta-features so that high-dimensional data can be handled at both levels. The proposed hierarchical Cox model can be efficiently fitted by a combination of iterative reweighted least squares and cyclic coordinate descent. Results: In a simulation study we show that when the external meta-features are informative, the regularized hierarchical model can substantially improve prediction performance over standard regularized Cox regression. We illustrate the proposed model with applications to breast cancer and melanoma survival based on gene expression profiles, which show the improvement in prediction performance by applying meta-features, as well as the discovery of important omic feature sets with sparse regularization at meta-feature level. Conclusions: The proposed hierarchical regularized regression model enables integration of external meta-feature information directly into the modeling process for time-to-event outcomes, improves prediction performance when the external meta-feature data is informative. Importantly, when the external meta-features are uninformative, the prediction performance based on the regularized hierarchical model is on par with standard regularized Cox regression, indicating robustness of the framework. In addition to developing predictive signatures, the model can also be deployed in discovery applications where the main goal is to identify important features associated with the outcome rather than developing a predictive model.
Background: Chemical bioproduction has attracted attention as a key technology in a decarbonized society. In computational design for chemical bioproduction, it is necessary to predict changes in metabolic fluxes when up-/down-regulating enzymatic reactions, that is, responses of the system to enzyme perturbations. Structural sensitivity analysis (SSA) was previously developed as a method to predict qualitative responses to enzyme perturbations on the basis of the structural information of the reaction network. However, the network structural information can sometimes be insufficient to predict qualitative responses unambiguously, which is a practical issue in bioproduction applications. To address this, in this study, we propose BayesianSSA, a Bayesian statistical model based on SSA. BayesianSSA extracts environmental information from perturbation datasets collected in environments of interest and integrates it into SSA predictions. Results: We applied BayesianSSA to synthetic and real datasets of the central metabolic pathway of Escherichia coli. Our result demonstrates that BayesianSSA can successfully integrate environmental information extracted from perturbation data into SSA predictions. In addition, the posterior distribution estimated by BayesianSSA can be associated with the known pathway reported to enhance succinate export flux in previous studies. Conclusions: We believe that BayesianSSA will accelerate the chemical bioproduction process and contribute to advancements in the field.
Predicting the transcriptional response of chemical perturbations is crucial to understanding gene function and developing drug candidates, promising a streamlined drug development process. Single-cell sequencing has provided an ideal data basis for training machine learning models for this task. Recent advances in deep learning have led to significant improvements in predictions of chemical as well as genetic perturbations at the single cell level. Experiments have shown that different cell types exhibit distinct transcriptional patterns and responses to perturbation. This poses a fundamental problem for predicting transcriptional responses of drugs or cell types outside the training data. Accordingly, existing methods lack cell-type- specific modeling or do not explicitly provide an interpretable mechanism for the gene features. In this study, we introduce a novel approach that employs a network representation of various cell types as an inductive bias, improving prediction performance in scenarios with limited data while acknowledging cellular differences. We applied our framework to four small-scale single-cell perturbation datasets and one large-scale screening experiment, demonstrating that this representation can inherently generalize to previously unseen cell types. Furthermore, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in predicting the post-perturbation response in unobserved cell types.
Cancer remains a global health challenge, with significant morbidity and mortality rates. In 2020, cancer caused nearly 10 million deaths, making it the second leading cause of death worldwide. However, the emergence of chemoresistance becomes a major hurdle in successfully treating patients. Human gut microbes have been recognized for their role in modulating drug efficacy through their metabolites, ultimately leading to chemoresistance. The available databases are currently limited to knowledge regarding the interactions between gut microbiome and drugs. However, a database containing the human gut microbial gene sequences, and their effect on the efficacy of chemotherapy for cancer patients has not yet been reported. To address this challenge, we present the Microbial Chemoresistance Knowledgebase (MiCK), a comprehensive database cataloging microbial gene sequences associated with chemoresistance cancers. MiCK contains 1.6 million sequences of 29 gene types linked to chemoresistance and drug metabolism, curated manually from recent literature and sequence databases. The database supports efficient data retrieval and analysis, providing a user-friendly web interface for sequence search and download functionalities. MiCK aims to facilitate the understanding and mitigation of chemoresistance in cancers by serving as a valuable resource for researchers.
The involvement of protein intrinsic disorder in essential biological processes, it is well known in structural biology. However, experimental methods for detecting intrinsic structural disorder and directly measuring highly dynamic behavior of protein structure are limited. To address this issue, several computational methods to predict intrinsic disorder from protein sequences were developed and their performance is evaluated by the Critical Assessment of protein Intrinsic Disorder (CAID). In this paper, we describe a new computational method, PredIDR, which provides accurate prediction of intrinsically disordered regions in proteins, mimicking experimental X-ray missing residues. Indeed, missing residues in Protein Data Bank (PDB) were used as positive examples to train a deep convolutional neural network which produces two types of output for short and long regions. PredIDR took part in the second round of CAID and was as accurate as the top state-of-the-art IDR prediction methods.
Phylogenomics has become a prominent method in systematics, conservation biology, and biomedicine, as it can leverage hundreds to thousands of genes derived from genomic or transcriptomic data to infer evolutionary relationships. However, obtaining high-quality genomes and transcriptomes requires samples preserved with high-quality DNA and RNA and demands considerable sequencing costs and lofty bioinformatic efforts (e.g., genome/transcriptome assembly and annotation). Notably, only fragmented DNA reads are accessible in some rare species due to the difficulty in sample collection and preservation, such as those inhabiting the deep sea. To address this issue, we here introduce the VEHoP (Versatile, Easy-to-use Homology-based Phylogenomic) pipeline, designed to infer protein-coding regions from DNA assemblies and generate alignments of orthologous sequences, concatenated matrices, and phylogenetic trees. This pipeline aims to 1) expand taxonomic sampling by accommodating a wide range of input files, including draft genomes, transcriptomes, and well-annotated genomes, and 2) simplify the process of conducting phylogenomic analyses and thus make it more accessible to researchers from diverse backgrounds. We first evaluated the performance of VEHoP using datasets of Ostreida, yielding robust phylogenetic trees with strong bootstrap support. We then applied VEHoP to reconstruct the phylogenetic relationship in the enigmatic deep-sea gastropod order Neomphalida, obtaining a robust phylogenetic backbone for this group. 
MultiOmicsAgent (MOAgent) is an innovative, Python based open-source tool for biomarker discovery, utilizing machine learning techniques specifically extreme gradient-boosted decision trees to process multi-omics data. With its cross-platform compatibility, user-oriented graphical interface and a well-documented API, MOAgent not only meets the needs of both coding professionals and those new to machine learning but also addresses common data analysis challenges like data incompleteness, class imbalances and data leakage between disjoint data splits. MOAgent's guided data analysis strategy opens up data-driven insights from digitized clinical biospecimen cohorts and makes advanced data analysis accessible and reliable for a wide audience.
Several peptide-based drugs fail in clinical trials due to their toxicity or hemolytic activity against red blood cells (RBCs). Existing methods predict hemolytic peptides but not the concentration (HC50) required to lyse 50% of RBCs. In this study, we developed a classification model and regression model to identify and quantify the hemolytic activity of peptides. Our models were trained and validated on 1924 peptides with experimentally determined HC50 against mammalian RBCs. Analysis indicates that hydrophobic and positively charged residues were associated with higher hemolytic activity. Our classification models achieved a maximum AUC of 0.909 using a hybrid model of ESM-2 and a motif-based approach. Regression models using compositional features achieved R of 0.739 with R2 of 0.543. Our models outperform existing methods and are implemented in the web-based platform HemoPI2 and standalone software for designing hemolytic peptides with desired HC50 values
Cytochrome c (Cyt-c), encoded by CYCS gene, is crucial for electron transport, peroxidase activity, and apoptosis. Mutations in CYCS can cause thrombocytopenia 4 (THC4), a disorder with low platelet counts. We have, for instance, recently described six Italian families with five different heterozygous missense CYCS variants. These mutations likely enhance peroxidase and apoptotic activities, yet mechanisms causing reduced platelet production and increased apoptosis are unclear. This study investigates all clinically important Cyt-c variants using an integrated bioinformatics approach. Our findings reveal that all variants are at evolutionarily conserved sites, likely disrupting Cyt-c function and contributing to disease phenotypes. Specific variants likely affect phosphorylation (T20I, V21G, Y49H), ubiquitination (G42S, A52T, A52V), and glycosylation (H27Y, N32H, L33V, G42S). Cyt-c variants may influence the function of interacting genes and proteins involved in apoptosis and mitochondrial function. Molecular dynamics simulations reveal significant structural differences from the wild-type, with mutants showing reduced stability and increased flexibility, particularly in the omega loops. These changes weaken hydrogen bonds and increase distances between key residues, opening the heme active site. This open conformation likely enhances accessibility to small molecules such as H2O2, thereby promoting peroxidase activity, which may enhance apoptosis and likely impact megakaryopoiesis and platelet homeostasis in THC4.
Understanding gene regulatory networks (GRNs) is crucial for elucidating cellular mechanisms and advancing therapeutic interventions. Original methods for GRN inference from bulk expression data often struggled with the high dimensionality and inherent noise in the data. Here we introduce RegDiffusion, a new class of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models focusing on the regulatory effects among feature variables. RegDiffusion introduces Gaussian noise to the input data following a diffusion schedule and uses a neural network with a parameterized adjacency matrix to predict the added noise. We show that using this process, GRNs can be learned effectively with a surprisingly simple model architecture. In our benchmark experiments, RegDiffusion shows superior performance compared to several baseline methods in multiple datasets. We also demonstrate that RegDiffusion can infer biologically meaningful regulatory networks from real-world single-cell data sets with over 15,000 genes in under 5 minutes. This work not only introduces a fresh perspective on GRN inference but also highlights the promising capacity of diffusion-based models in the area of single-cell analysis.