We present Stable Video 4D (SV4D), a latent video diffusion model for multi-frame and multi-view consistent dynamic 3D content generation. Unlike previous methods that rely on separately trained generative models for video generation and novel view synthesis, we design a unified diffusion model to generate novel view videos of dynamic 3D objects. Specifically, given a monocular reference video, SV4D generates novel views for each video frame that are temporally consistent. We then use the generated novel view videos to optimize an implicit 4D representation (dynamic NeRF) efficiently, without the need for cumbersome SDS-based optimization used in most prior works. To train our unified novel view video generation model, we curated a dynamic 3D object dataset from the existing Objaverse dataset. Extensive experimental results on multiple datasets and user studies demonstrate SV4D's state-of-the-art performance on novel-view video synthesis as well as 4D generation compared to prior works.
When seeking information from unfamiliar documents, users frequently pose questions that cannot be answered by the documents. While existing large language models (LLMs) identify these unanswerable questions, they do not assist users in reformulating their questions, thereby reducing their overall utility. We curate CouldAsk, an evaluation benchmark composed of existing and new datasets for document-grounded question answering, specifically designed to study reformulating unanswerable questions. We evaluate state-of-the-art open-source and proprietary LLMs on CouldAsk. The results demonstrate the limited capabilities of these models in reformulating questions. Specifically, GPT-4 and Llama2-7B successfully reformulate questions only 26% and 12% of the time, respectively. Error analysis shows that 62% of the unsuccessful reformulations stem from the models merely rephrasing the questions or even generating identical questions. We publicly release the benchmark and the code to reproduce the experiments. 
This paper investigates multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL), which focuses on learning Pareto optimal policies in the presence of multiple reward functions. Despite MORL's significant empirical success, there is still a lack of satisfactory understanding of various MORL optimization targets and efficient learning algorithms. Our work offers a systematic analysis of several optimization targets to assess their abilities to find all Pareto optimal policies and controllability over learned policies by the preferences for different objectives. We then identify Tchebycheff scalarization as a favorable scalarization method for MORL. Considering the non-smoothness of Tchebycheff scalarization, we reformulate its minimization problem into a new min-max-max optimization problem. Then, for the stochastic policy class, we propose efficient algorithms using this reformulation to learn Pareto optimal policies. We first propose an online UCB-based algorithm to achieve an ε learning error with an O~(ε−2) sample complexity for a single given preference. To further reduce the cost of environment exploration under different preferences, we propose a preference-free framework that first explores the environment without pre-defined preferences and then generates solutions for any number of preferences. We prove that it only requires an O~(ε−2) exploration complexity in the exploration phase and demands no additional exploration afterward. Lastly, we analyze the smooth Tchebycheff scalarization, an extension of Tchebycheff scalarization, which is proved to be more advantageous in distinguishing the Pareto optimal policies from other weakly Pareto optimal policies based on entry values of preference vectors. Furthermore, we extend our algorithms and theoretical analysis to accommodate this optimization target.
Large Language Models (LLMs) excel in diverse tasks but often underperform in specialized fields due to limited domain-specific or proprietary corpus. Continual pre-training (CPT) enhances LLM capabilities by imbuing new domain-specific or proprietary knowledge while replaying general corpus to prevent catastrophic forgetting. The data mixture ratio of general corpus and domain-specific corpus, however, has been chosen heuristically, leading to sub-optimal training efficiency in practice. In this context, we attempt to re-visit the scaling behavior of LLMs under the hood of CPT, and discover a power-law relationship between loss, mixture ratio, and training tokens scale. We formalize the trade-off between general and domain-specific capabilities, leading to a well-defined Critical Mixture Ratio (CMR) of general and domain data. By striking the balance, CMR maintains the model's general ability and achieves the desired domain transfer, ensuring the highest utilization of available resources. Therefore, if we value the balance between efficiency and effectiveness, CMR can be consider as the optimal mixture ratio.Through extensive experiments, we ascertain the predictability of CMR, and propose CMR scaling law and have substantiated its generalization. These findings offer practical guidelines for optimizing LLM training in specialized domains, ensuring both general and domain-specific performance while efficiently managing training resources. 
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has enabled social robots to generate trajectories without human-designed rules or interventions, which makes it more effective than hard-coded systems for generalizing to complex real-world scenarios. However, social navigation is a safety-critical task that requires robots to avoid collisions with pedestrians while previous RL-based solutions fall short in safety performance in complex environments. To enhance the safety of RL policies, to the best of our knowledge, we propose the first algorithm, SoNIC, that integrates adaptive conformal inference (ACI) with constrained reinforcement learning (CRL) to learn safe policies for social navigation. More specifically, our method augments RL observations with ACI-generated nonconformity scores and provides explicit guidance for agents to leverage the uncertainty metrics to avoid safety-critical areas by incorporating safety constraints with spatial relaxation. Our method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in terms of both safety and adherence to social norms by a large margin and demonstrates much stronger robustness to out-of-distribution scenarios. 
As learning-to-rank models are increasingly deployed for decision-making in areas with profound life implications, the FairML community has been developing fair learning-to-rank (LTR) models. These models rely on the availability of sensitive demographic features such as race or sex. However, in practice, regulatory obstacles and privacy concerns protect this data from collection and use. As a result, practitioners may either need to promote fairness despite the absence of these features or turn to demographic inference tools to attempt to infer them. Given that these tools are fallible, this paper aims to further understand how errors in demographic inference impact the fairness performance of popular fair LTR strategies. In which cases would it be better to keep such demographic attributes hidden from models versus infer them? We examine a spectrum of fair LTR strategies ranging from fair LTR with and without demographic features hidden versus inferred to fairness-unaware LTR followed by fair re-ranking. We conduct a controlled empirical investigation modeling different levels of inference errors by systematically perturbing the inferred sensitive attribute. We also perform three case studies with real-world datasets and popular open-source inference methods. Our findings reveal that as inference noise grows, LTR-based methods that incorporate fairness considerations into the learning process may increase bias. In contrast, fair re-ranking strategies are more robust to inference errors.
We introduce EuroCropsML, an analysis-ready remote sensing machine learning dataset for time series crop type classification of agricultural parcels in Europe. It is the first dataset designed to benchmark transnational few-shot crop type classification algorithms that supports advancements in algorithmic development and research comparability. It comprises 706 683 multi-class labeled data points across 176 classes, featuring annual time series of per-parcel median pixel values from Sentinel-2 L1C data for 2021, along with crop type labels and spatial coordinates. Based on the open-source EuroCrops collection, EuroCropsML is publicly available on Zenodo.
In less than a year practitioners and researchers witnessed a rapid and wide implementation of Generative Artificial Intelligence. The daily availability of new models proposed by practitioners and researchers has enabled quick adoption. Textual GAIs capabilities enable researchers worldwide to explore new generative scenarios simplifying and hastening all timeconsuming text generation and analysis tasks. Motivation. The exponentially growing number of publications in our field with the increased accessibility to information due to digital libraries makes conducting systematic literature reviews and mapping studies an effort and timeinsensitive task Stemmed from this challenge we investigated and envisioned the role of GAIs in evidencebased software engineering. Future Directions. Based on our current investigation we will follow up the vision with the creation and empirical validation of a comprehensive suite of models to effectively support EBSE researchers 
Integrating low-light image enhancement techniques, in which diffusion-based AI-generated content (AIGC) models are promising, is necessary to enhance nighttime teleoperation. Remarkably, the AIGC model is computation-intensive, thus necessitating the allocation of AIGC tasks to edge servers with ample computational resources. Given the distinct cost of the AIGC model trained with varying-sized datasets and AIGC tasks possessing disparate demand, it is imperative to formulate a differential pricing strategy to optimize the utility of teleoperators and edge servers concurrently. Nonetheless, the pricing strategy formulation is under information asymmetry, i.e., the demand (e.g., the difficulty level of AIGC tasks and their distribution) of AIGC tasks is hidden information to edge servers. Additionally, manually assessing the difficulty level of AIGC tasks is tedious and unnecessary for teleoperators. To this end, we devise a framework of AIGC task allocation assisted by the Vision Language Model (VLM)-empowered contract theory, which includes two components: VLM-empowered difficulty assessment and contract theory-assisted AIGC task allocation. The first component enables automatic and accurate AIGC task difficulty assessment. The second component is capable of formulating the pricing strategy for edge servers under information asymmetry, thereby optimizing the utility of both edge servers and teleoperators. The simulation results demonstrated that our proposed framework can improve the average utility of teleoperators and edge servers by 10.88~12.43% and 1.4~2.17%, respectively.
Automated reasoning is a key technology in the young but rapidly growing field of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). Explanability helps build trust in artificial intelligence systems beyond their mere predictive accuracy and robustness. In this paper, we propose a cycle of scientific discovery that combines machine learning with automated reasoning for the generation and the selection of explanations. We present a taxonomy of explanation selection problems that draws on insights from sociology and cognitive science. These selection criteria subsume existing notions and extend them with new properties.